---
title: "Emotional Intelligence and Leadership"
date: 2020-02-10T09:00:00-05:00
draft: false
toc: true

categories:
  - Leadership
tags:
  - EQ
  - Team Building
---

![Emotional Intelligence and Leadership](/images/EQarticle.png "center")

One of the great buzzwords of the last several years has been EQ, or
emotional intelligence.  John Maxwell ranks this as the most important
form of intelligence because it is behind our ability to connect with
others.  In this time of social distancing, unrest, injustice, and
uncertainty about the future connecting with others is the most
important thing we can be doing.  

IT professionals, in particular, can reap benefits from focusing their
#leadership and their teams on raising their emotional
intelligence. Zoom and Webex meetings take away some of the personal
touch, as our interactions tend to be hyper-focused and lose the nuances
gained by a handful of interpersonal meetings during a typical
workday. These nuances can be the difference between cohesiveness and a
functionally competent but unengaged team.

However, it is not just the team interactions that matter or that can
use a boost. Technology is always improving and equalizing
competitors. Software such as ServiceNow are creating ecosystems that
are highly integrated and able to replace multiple disparate legacy
systems.  This means that maintaining an advantage, especially for the
smaller business, comes in the form of connecting with customers rather
than offering a functionally different product or service.  

The ever-evolving capabilities of the IT world in the areas of
automation and AI lead to large strides in efficiencies and capabilities
but will narrow the differences between competitors. This will create an
even higher need for emotional intelligence and building the correct
synergies in your team. The human component and ability to connect will
be the difference maker. This applies both to building stellar teams as
well as to competing for customer loyalty.

Surprisingly step one of improving emotional intelligence begins not
with working with others, but with introspection and
self-improvement.  Emotional Intelligence is the ability to connect with
others, get into their context so that you know what they know. The
biggest barrier to connecting with others is not knowing yourself.

How are you taking steps to build emotional intelligence?

**This was originally published on LinkedIn in 2020, reposted here after the launch of this site**
