---
title: "Is it thinking? Artificial Intelligence: A Guide for Thinking
Humans"
date: 2024-11-21T09:00:00-05:00
draft: false
categories:
  - Technology
  - AI
  - Book Review
tags:
  - AI
  - Machine Learning
  - Productivity
  - Tools
toc: true
---

![Is it thinking](/images/is-it-thinking.png "center")

**I recommend reading \"Artificial Intelligence: A Guide for Thinking
Humans\"**

I just finished up \"Artificial Intelligence: A Guide for Thinking
Humans\" by Melanie Mitchell. It was a great, quick read. I recommend it
to anyone that wants a great primer on AI with or without a background
in tech. Mitchell does an excellent job making complex topics
approachable and sharing metaphors and examples that make AI\'s nuances
understandable for non-specialists. Dr. Mitchell manages to explore the
topics to a certain depth without drowning you in tech speak.

AI advancements since the book\'s publication in 2019 mean that some of
the information is out of date, especially around generative models and
their evolving impact on creative industries. Since 2019, generative
models have advanced significantly, with the rise of models like GPT-3
and GPT-4, as well as the development of multimodal models like DALL-E
and Midjourney, which have generated a lot of media buzz, increased
interest in AI, but also potentially distorted the true capabilities of
AI. If Mitchell were to write an updated edition, I would be interested
to see how her perspectives have evolved since then, especially
regarding combinations of causal and generative AI. Causal and
generative AI together more closely simulate human reasoning and allow
for the generation of ideas combined with an exploration of potential
impacts from the ideas -- to make a very loose analogy -- it has the
potential to allow for AI brainstorming.

One of the highlights of the book is the light it shines on the
complexity with which humans think, and the nature of intelligence. 
Mitchell makes a compelling argument about much of human intellect
arising from experiential knowledge of the surrounding world and the
constraints that we live with. Mitchell examines the idea, proposed by
Kurzweil of an AI singularity, which is a future state in which computer
intelligence surpasses human intelligence, leading to the inability for
humans to intervene and put limits or control on technological
progress.  The feasibility of which is still dubious and depends largely
on how intelligence is defined. Machine learning, LLMs, Big Data, and AI
models may eventually reason in ways similar to humans, but true
understanding, consciousness, and experiential learning are far off.
Personally, I don\'t see AI surpassing human reasoning abilities in the
near term, though I do see the risk of its \"usurping\" us if we misuse
it.

That is to say if we rest on AI rather than embracing it as a tool to
solve even greater challenges, if we relegate the hard work of mulling
over a problem and embracing the trials and errors that lead to
breakthroughs -- if we as a society don't start to emphasize the skill
of critical thinking , perhaps THE most important skill in the AI age --
then it is easy to imagine a world in which human intelligence has been
usurped by the machines.

Anyone else read it recently? How do you feel it holds up given the
latest developments in AI? Are we on the edge of "singularity"?  What
skills do we need to invest our time and energy in developing to make
the most of the of the new technologies exploding onto the scene and
avoid being usurped?

Next up on my reading list, The Model Thinker -- by Scott Page.

![A colorful drawing of various objects AI-generated content may be
incorrect.](/images/is-it-thinking2.png "center")

note: this AI generated image was one of several attempts to generate an
image that represented the spirit of this short article. How would a
human illustrator convey this, and why would that be different than what
was generated by GPT4o \\ DallE?
